Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, to the saints who are at Ephesus, and the faithful in Christ Jesus:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ;
even as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we would be holy and without blemish before him in love;
having predestined us for adoption as children through Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his desire,
to the praise of the glory of his grace, by which he freely bestowed favor on us in the Beloved,
in whom we have our redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace,
making known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he purposed in him
to an administration of the fullness of the times, to sum up all things in Christ, the things in the heavens, and the things on the earth, in him;
in whom also we were assigned an inheritance, having been foreordained according to the purpose of him who works all things after the counsel of his will;
to the end that we should be to the praise of his glory, we who had before hoped in Christ:
in whom you also, having heard the word of the truth, the Good News of your salvation--in whom, having also believed, you were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise,
who is a pledge of our inheritance, to the redemption of God's own possession, to the praise of his glory.
that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give to you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him;
having the eyes of your hearts enlightened, that you may know what is the hope of his calling, and what are the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints,
He put all things in subjection under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things for the assembly,
You were made alive when you were dead in transgressions and sins,
among whom we also all once lived in the lust of our flesh, doing the desires of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature children of wrath, even as the rest.
But God, being rich in mercy, for his great love with which he loved us,
and raised us up with him, and made us to sit with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus,
for by grace you have been saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God,
For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared before that we would walk in them.
Therefore remember that once you, the Gentiles in the flesh, who are called "uncircumcision" by that which is called "circumcision," (in the flesh, made by hands);
that you were at that time separate from Christ, alienated from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of the promise, having no hope and without God in the world.
But now in Christ Jesus you who once were far off are made near in the blood of Christ.
For he is our peace, who made both one, and broke down the middle wall of partition,
He came and preached peace to you who were far off and to those who were near.
For through him we both have our access in one Spirit to the Father.
So then you are no longer strangers and foreigners, but you are fellow citizens with the saints, and of the household of God,
being built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief cornerstone;
in whom the whole building, fitted together, grows into a holy temple in the Lord;
in whom you also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit.
For this cause I, Paul, am the prisoner of Christ Jesus on behalf of you Gentiles,
if it is so that you have heard of the administration of that grace of God which was given me toward you;
how that by revelation the mystery was made known to me, as I wrote before in few words,
by which, when you read, you can perceive my understanding in the mystery of Christ;
which in other generations was not made known to the children of men, as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets in the Spirit;
of which I was made a servant, according to the gift of that grace of God which was given me according to the working of his power.
To me, the very least of all saints, was this grace given, to preach to the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ,
to the intent that now through the assembly the manifold wisdom of God might be made known to the principalities and the powers in the heavenly places,
according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord;
in whom we have boldness and access in confidence through our faith in him.
Therefore I ask that you may not lose heart at my troubles for you, which are your glory.
that he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, that you may be strengthened with power through his Spirit in the inward man;
I therefore, the prisoner in the Lord, beg you to walk worthily of the calling with which you were called,
with all lowliness and humility, with patience, bearing with one another in love;
being eager to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
There is one body, and one Spirit, even as you also were called in one hope of your calling;
But to each one of us was the grace given according to the measure of the gift of Christ.
Therefore he says, "When he ascended on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men."
Now this, "He ascended," what is it but that he also first descended into the lower parts of the earth?
He who descended is the one who also ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill all things.
He gave some to be apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, shepherds and teachers;
for the perfecting of the saints, to the work of serving, to the building up of the body of Christ;
that we may no longer be children, tossed back and forth and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the trickery of men, in craftiness, after the wiles of error;
but speaking truth in love, we may grow up in all things into him, who is the head, Christ;
being darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of God, because of the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardening of their hearts;
who having become callous gave themselves up to lust, to work all uncleanness with greediness.
But you did not learn Christ that way;
that you put away, as concerning your former way of life, the old man, that grows corrupt after the lusts of deceit;
and put on the new man, who in the likeness of God has been created in righteousness and holiness of truth.
Therefore putting away falsehood, speak truth each one with his neighbor. For we are members of one another.
"Be angry, and don't sin." Don't let the sun go down on your wrath,
neither give place to the devil.
Let him who stole steal no more; but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have something to give to him who has need.
Let no corrupt speech proceed out of your mouth, but such as is good for building up as the need may be, that it may give grace to those who hear.
Don't grieve the Holy Spirit of God, in whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.
Let all bitterness, wrath, anger, outcry, and slander, be put away from you, with all malice.
And be kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving each other, just as God also in Christ forgave you.
Be therefore imitators of God, as beloved children.
Walk in love, even as Christ also loved you, and gave himself up for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling fragrance.
But sexual immorality, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not even be mentioned among you, as becomes saints;
nor filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not appropriate; but rather giving of thanks.
Know this for sure, that no sexually immoral person, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and God.
Let no one deceive you with empty words. For because of these things, the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience.
Therefore don't be partakers with them.
For you were once darkness, but are now light in the Lord. Walk as children of light,
for the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and truth,
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather even reprove them.
For the things which are done by them in secret, it is a shame even to speak of.
But all things, when they are reproved, are revealed by the light, for everything that reveals is light.
Therefore he says, "Awake, you who sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ will shine on you."
Therefore watch carefully how you walk, not as unwise, but as wise;
redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
Therefore don't be foolish, but understand what the will of the Lord is.
Don't be drunken with wine, in which is dissipation, but be filled with the Spirit,
speaking to one another in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs; singing, and making melody in your heart to the Lord;
giving thanks always concerning all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to God, even the Father;
subjecting yourselves one to another in the fear of Christ.
Wives, be subject to your own husbands, as to the Lord.
For the husband is the head of the wife, and Christ also is the head of the assembly, being himself the savior of the body.
But as the assembly is subject to Christ, so let the wives also be to their own husbands in everything.
Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the assembly, and gave himself up for it;
that he might present the assembly to himself gloriously, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish.
Even so husbands also ought to love their own wives as their own bodies. He who loves his own wife loves himself.
For no man ever hated his own flesh; but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord also does the assembly;
"For this cause a man will leave his father and mother, and will be joined to his wife. The two will become one flesh."
This mystery is great, but I speak concerning Christ and of the assembly.
Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.
"Honor your father and mother," which is the first commandment with a promise:
You fathers, don't provoke your children to wrath, but nurture them in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.
Servants, be obedient to those who according to the flesh are your masters, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as to Christ;
not in the way of service only when eyes are on you, as men pleasers; but as servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart;
knowing that whatever good thing each one does, he will receive the same again from the Lord, whether he is bound or free.
Finally, be strong in the Lord, and in the strength of his might.
Put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.
For our wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but against the principalities, against the powers, against the world's rulers of the darkness of this age, and against the spiritual forces of wickedness in the heavenly places.
Therefore put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and, having done all, to stand.
Stand therefore, having the utility belt of truth buckled around your waist, and having put on the breastplate of righteousness,
above all, taking up the shield of faith, with which you will be able to quench all the fiery darts of the evil one.
And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God;
with all prayer and requests, praying at all times in the Spirit, and being watchful to this end in all perseverance and requests for all the saints:
on my behalf, that utterance may be given to me in opening my mouth, to make known with boldness the mystery of the Good News,
for which I am an ambassador in chains; that in it I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak.
But that you also may know my affairs, how I am doing, Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will make known to you all things;
whom I have sent to you for this very purpose, that you may know our state, and that he may comfort your hearts.
Peace be to the brothers, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
