Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith of God's chosen ones, and the knowledge of the truth which is according to godliness,
but in his own time revealed his word in the message with which I was entrusted according to the commandment of God our Savior;
to Titus, my true child according to a common faith: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior.
I left you in Crete for this reason, that you would set in order the things that were lacking, and appoint elders in every city, as I directed you;
if anyone is blameless, the husband of one wife, having children who believe, who are not accused of loose or unruly behavior.
For the overseer must be blameless, as God's steward; not self-pleasing, not easily angered, not given to wine, not violent, not greedy for dishonest gain;
but given to hospitality, a lover of good, sober minded, fair, holy, self-controlled;
holding to the faithful word which is according to the teaching, that he may be able to exhort in the sound doctrine, and to convict those who contradict him.
For there are also many unruly men, vain talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision,
whose mouths must be stopped; men who overthrow whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for dishonest gain's sake.
One of them, a prophet of their own, said, "Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, and idle gluttons."
This testimony is true. For this cause, reprove them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith,
To the pure, all things are pure; but to those who are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure; but both their mind and their conscience are defiled.
But say the things which fit sound doctrine,
that older men should be temperate, sensible, sober minded, sound in faith, in love, and in patience:
and that older women likewise be reverent in behavior, not slanderers nor enslaved to much wine, teachers of that which is good;
that they may train the young women to love their husbands, to love their children,
Likewise, exhort the younger men to be sober minded;
in all things showing yourself an example of good works; in your teaching showing integrity, seriousness, incorruptibility,
Exhort servants to be in subjection to their own masters, and to be well-pleasing in all things; not contradicting;
For the grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation to all men,
instructing us to the intent that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we would live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world;
who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify for himself a people for his own possession, zealous for good works.
Say these things and exhort and reprove with all authority. Let no man despise you.
Remind them to be in subjection to rulers and to authorities, to be obedient, to be ready for every good work,
For we were also once foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving various lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another.
But when the kindness of God our Savior and his love toward mankind appeared,
This saying is faithful, and concerning these things I desire that you affirm confidently, so that those who have believed God may be careful to maintain good works. These things are good and profitable to men;
